---
layout: slideshow
# styleurl: https://cdn.rawgit.com/sesync-ci/lesson-style/1.0.0
styleurl: https://rawgit.com/sesync-ci/lesson-style/master
style: /docs/css/slideshow.css
reveal: https://cdn.rawgit.com/hakimel/reveal.js/3.5.0
reveal-theme: /css/theme/moon.css
---

# Getting to Data 

<!--[10:45 -- 12:00, total 75 min]-->

[Underwood et al. (2013)] use secondary data to estimate rates and locations of illegal ivory trade.

===

Identify a **strength** and a **weakness** of the following association between concept, variable, and data.

- **Concept**: Illegal wildlife trade in African nations
- **Variable**: Nationwide, annual seizures of illegally aquired ivory
- **Data**: [Any of the "sz.xx" columns in the ETIS data supplement].

[Underwood et al. (2013)]: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0076539
[Any of the "sz.xx" columns in the ETIS data supplement]: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/file?type=supplementary&id=info:doi/10.1371/journal.pone.0076539.s007

<!-- 10 min -->

===

Think about a concept and variable relevant to the research question you've identified.

1. Think about a concept (possibly a node in the concept map) for your project, and describe an associated variable.
1. Explain how the variable relates to your research question.

<!-- 15 min -->

===

## Getting Secondary Data Online

1. Supplements to peer-reviewed publications
1. Data repositories (government, or university)
1. Directly from primary data provider 

<!-- 15 min -->

===

### Data Supplements

Peer-reviewed scientific journals increasingly demand that contributors include **raw data** as a supplement or appendix to published reports.

<!-- google scholar, "illegal ivory trade" -->

===

Search for peer-reviewed articles that may have supplemental data with:

1. Google Scholar
1. Library electronic indexes
  - EBSCO
  - JSTOR
1. Subject area journal

===

### Data Repositories

A data repository is an organization dedicated to long term storage of digital data, usually accessible to the public over the internet.

===

Each repository is like a library for data, except that data is placed in only one library.

===

Data repositories have all kinds of data. Most commonly they host data associated with a scientific report, which the authors' aim to make publicly accessible.

===

- [Figshare](https://figshare.com)
- [Dataverse Network](https://dataverse.org)
- [ICPSR](https://www.icpsr.umich.edu)

===

### Direct from primary data provider

1. Specific monitoring program's data portal
1. An entire organization's data catalog
1. E-mail a study's author

===

<!-- monitorring programs are very diverse: check out traffic, -->

Monitoring programs that use continuously recording sensors often have associated data portals.

- [USGS Landsat](https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov)
- [National Data Buoy Center](http://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/)
- [Eyes on the Bay](http://eyesonthebay.dnr.maryland.gov/)

===

Some governments/organizations that produce primary data have a catalog for all their data products, for example:

- [Data.gov](https://data.gov)
- [NOAA](https://data.noaa.gov/datasetsearch/datasetsearch.html)
- [US Census Bureau](https://www.census.gov)

===

### Data Quality

1. Must be able to identify methods for primary data collection
1. Good metadata is an indicator of good data

===

## Group Activity

Find and download one dataset for your project.

<!-- 20 minutes -->

===

# Working with Data in RStudio

===

- R language
- R interpreter
- RStudio application

===

## Reading Different Data Formats

===

### Text files (.txt, .csv)

Use RStudio "Import (readr)" to generate the following R commands:

~~~r
library(readr)
sediment <- read_delim(
    "data/MusselWatch_EastCoast_Trace_Elements_Sediment.txt",
    "\t", escape_double = FALSE,
    trim_ws = TRUE)
View(sediment)
~~~
{:.input}

===

### Excel files (.xlsx)

Save as a "CSV" (a comma-separated-values text file), then go back to the previous step!

===

### Special formats (.shp, .hdf5)

Special data formats are used for spatial data. The American Community Survey (ACS) includes socio-economic data produced by the US Census Bureau.

~~~r
library(sf)
acs <- read_sf('data/acs')
View(acs)
~~~
{:.input}

===

The `acs` table has a special column for spatial data types, that are nicely displayed on a background map by `leaflet` with the [right coordinate reference system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spatial_reference_system).

~~~r
library(leaflet)
acs <- st_transform(acs, 4326)
~~~
{:.input}

===

~~~r
acs %>%
  leaflet() %>%
  addTiles() %>%
  addPolygons(
    color = "#444444", weight = 1,
    opacity = 0.5, fillOpacity = 0.5,
    fillColor = ~colorQuantile(
        "YlOrRd", SHAPE_AREA)(SHAPE_AREA)
    )
~~~
{:.input}

===

## Inspecting your Data

===

The named elements of `sediment`.

~~~r
names(sediment)
~~~
{:.input}

===

The data types in `sediment`.

~~~r
str(sediment)
~~~
{:.input}

===

The summary of continuous and discrete variables in `sediment`.

~~~r
summary(sediment)
~~~
{:.input}

===

## Individual Activity

Read data into R.

Identify the column names and summarize their content.

===

## Graphics in R

===

### Goals

- Create several different kinds of plots
- Learn to **layer** up visual representations of data
- Glimpse the vast collection of [ggplot2](){:.rpkg} options

===

~~~r
library(readr)
landings <- read_csv(
    "data/MF_MONTHLY_LANDINGS.RESULTS", 
    skip = 5)
~~~
{:.input}

===

Special charachters make bad variable names; this code changes the `$` column's name.

~~~r
names(landings)[7] <- "USD"
~~~
{:.input}

===

## Layered graphics

As a first example, create a simple scatter plot of one variable on the x-axis versus another on the y-axis.

~~~r
library(ggplot2)
ggplot(landings,
       aes(x = Pounds, y = USD)) +
  geom_point()
~~~
{:.input}

===

The `ggplot` command expects a data frame and an aesthetic mapping. The `aes` function creates the aesthetic, a mapping between variables in the data frame and visual elements in the plot. 

===

The `ggplot` function by itself does not display anything until we add a `geom_*` layer, in this example a `geom_point`. Layers are literally added, with `+`, to the object created by the `ggplot` function.

===

Color is also an "axis" that can be added to a plot, corresponding to another variable in the dataset.

~~~r
ggplot(landings, aes(
    x = Pounds, y = USD, color = Year)) +
  geom_point()
~~~
{:.input}

===

A purpose of vizualization is to make patterns obvious; a big part is reducing clutter with summary values (e.g. total, mean or median).

~~~r
ggplot(landings, aes(
    x = Year, y = Pounds)) +
  stat_summary(fun.y = sum, geom = 'line')
~~~
{:.input}

===

Recognizing, of course, that summaries can accidentally hide patterns.

~~~r
ggplot(landings, aes(
    x = Year, y = Pounds, color = State)) +
  stat_summary(fun.y = sum, geom = 'line')
~~~
{:.input}

===

Histograms show the range of possibilities for all the data collected for a single variable.

~~~r
ggplot(landings, aes(x = Pounds) +
  geom_histogram()
~~~
{:.input}

===

The "bin width" tunes a histogram for visual appeal if not something more significant.

~~~r
ggplot(landings, aes(x = Pounds) +
  geom_histogram(binwidth = 100000)
~~~
{:.input}

===

Distributions of data points for many different groups are vizualized with "boxplots".

~~~r
ggplot(landings, aes(
    x = Month, y = USD, color = State)) +
  geom_boxplot()
~~~
{:.input}

===

Force your axes to make intuitive sense.

~~~r
landings$Month <- factor(
  landings$Month, month.abb)
~~~
{:.input}

===

Label plots with the `labs()` function.

~~~r
ggplot(landings, aes(
    x = Month, y = USD, color = State)) +
  geom_boxplot() +
  labs(title = 'Value of Oyster Harvest: 1990-2016',
       x = '',
       y = 'Monthly Total (USD)')
~~~
{:.input}

===

Store shared components of a ggplot command as a variable for quick reuse.

~~~r
landings_plot <- ggplot(landings, aes(
    x = Month, y = USD,
    group = State, color = State)) +
  labs(
    title = 'Value of Oyster Harvest: 1990-2016',
    x = "",
    y = "Monthly Mean +/- SE (USD)")
~~~
{:.input}

===

Combine multiple visual elements by adding more "geoms".

~~~r
landings_plot +
  stat_summary(fun.y = mean, geom = 'line') +
  stat_summary(
    fun.data = mean_se, geom = 'errorbar')
~~~
{:.input}


===

Sometimes the best way to clarify data is to plot it separately, using `facet_wrap`.

~~~r
landings_plot +
  stat_summary(fun.y = mean, geom = 'line') +
  stat_summary(
    fun.data = mean_se, geom = 'errorbar') +
  facet_wrap(~ State)
~~~
{:.input}

===

Download the [ggplot2 cheatsheat](https://www.rstudio.com/resources/cheatsheets/) for help!

===

## Activity

Discuss 3 vizualizations that would help understand one of research
question identified in the morning.

===

# Continuting your RStudio Project

- Export the folder containing your .Rproj file
- Install R and RStudio on your computer
- Install packages  (like "ggplot2" and "leaflet") within RStudio
- Open the .Rproj file within RStudio
