---
layout: slideshow
styleurl: https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/SESYNC-ci/lesson-style@1.1
style: /docs/css/slideshow.css
reveal: https://cdn.rawgit.com/hakimel/reveal.js/3.5.0
reveal-theme: /css/theme/black.css
---

<section markdown="block">

## Mini-project Goals
{:style="text-transform: none;"}

Your team is here to practice, and we are here as coaches. In the time
scheduled for "data2doc", your team should aim to achieve the following goals:

- Collaborate on a GitHub repository.
- Introduce your team via a README (Tuesday AM).
- Script a reproducible "data-to-document" pipeline.
- Present mini-results (Friday PM).

</section>

<section markdown="block">

### Practice #1: Tuesday AM

1. Choose a git captain, and
    1. (Captain) create a GitHub repo,
    1. (Captain) invite collaborators, and
    1. (Teammates) accept invitation.
1. (Captain) Create a 'Rproj' and a skeleton `README.md`.
1. Clone the repo as a new RStudio project.
1. Complete one section of `REAMDE.md` and push to GitHub.

</section>

<section markdown="block">

### Practice #2: Tuesday PM

1. Discuss your data:
   1. Are your data in tidy tables?
   1. Can you define relationships between tables?
   1. How will you share it within the team?
1. Read data into R and prepare it for a simple analyis or visualization.
1. Update the `README.md` on GitHub.

</section>

<section markdown="block">

### Practice #3: Wednesday AM

1. Identify the source and projection of geospatial data you have, or that could be
relevant for your project.
1. Determine which R packages can perform the necessary geospatial data processing.
1. Continue work on a reproducible pipeline, reading and preparing data for analysis or vizualization.
1. Share in-progress code through your GitHub repo.

</section>

<section markdown="block">

### Practice #4: Wednesday PM

1. Discuss modeling approaches for your analysis.
1. Start work on a simple regression model, if appropriate.
1. Practice your collaborative workflow: stage, commit, pull, and push!

</section>

<section markdown="block">

### Practice #5: Thursday AM

1. Continue discussion on suitable models---consider classification.
1. Try to get a simple regression or classification model working.
1. Ensure your local repo is up-to-date with the origin on GitHub.

</section>

<section markdown="block">

### Practice #5: Thursday PM

1. Discuss the beginning steps of your reproducible pipeline. Can you aquire data programatically?
1. Discuss and experiment with suitable vizualization of your data or model output.
1. Use git to merge work on separate sections as necessary.

</section>

<section markdown="block">

### Practice #6: Friday PM

1. Prepare to present about your project
    1. as an RMarkdown document,
    1. as a GitHub Pages site produced by RMarkdown, or
    1. show code and vizualizations in progress.

</section>

<section markdown="block">

## Scrimage!

</section>
